♪ ♪
Shane Smith:
This week on  Vice:
the last-ditch effort
to fight climate change.
Steve Oldham:
This is the world's
first recyclable fuel.
It's compatible with any
vehicle in the world today.
(Neukermans speaking)
I hope that's not
any weird chemical, 'cause
I just put it in my mouth.
(chuckling)
Okay, great.
Leslie Field: The idea
is to try to rebuild
a natural system
with the least
possible intervention
you possibly could.
Jason Box:
We have started this era
of geoengineering.
It's going to be a wild ride.
(theme music playing)
(crowd shouting)
They're saying that right now,
it's time for change.
(indistinct shouting)
(helicopter blades whirring)
Narrator:
Man is actually causing the
average temperature to rise
two degrees per century.
I am, today, committing
the United States of America,
to develop an effective
and science-based response
to the issue of global warming.
Smith:
We've known
about climate change
for over 50 years.
Our response
to the dire warnings
has ranged from
too little too late,
to outright denial.
As a result, current
atmospheric carbon dioxide
now exceeds levels
that haven't been seen
in three million years,
long before
humans even existed.
This is a "Holy Shit"
moment.
Smith: It's worse
than holy shit.
Vice has addressed
this important issue
in all six of our seasons.
However, what we have seen,
is that instead of
comprehensively
addressing this crisis,
humanity is going backwards.
Trump:
The United States
will withdraw
from the Paris...
Climate Accord.
Smith:
Many scientists believe
that we have gone past
the point of no return,
and as such, need to focus
on much more radical ideas.
So, in this episode,
we are gonna look
at potential solutions
that could possibly steer us
back from the brink.
(Jason Box speaking)
So, we're here
in southern Greenland,
at what used to be
called Eagle Glacier,
so-called because
it looked like an eagle,
with two wings and a--
and a neck and a head.
The neck and the head
were here, melted.
That whole wing is melted
since we last came here.
This part of southern
Greenland is losing ice
faster than anywhere else
in Greenland,
in fact, as fast as
anywhere on Earth.
It's losing ice so fast,
that it's about three
trillion tons in a decade.
The coastal environment,
you know,
it's already just beginning
to be a problem.
Sandy was a good example
of high-tide plus storm surge,
plus sea-level rise,
then flooding
in the New York subway,
costing $60 billion...
-(snaps fingers)
-...like that.
So, we'll see more of those
type of extreme events.
We're fucked.
(chuckles)
Yeah, yeah.
So even halting emissions now,
we still have this
problem of 50 percent
too much CO2
in the atmosphere.
Plan A,
which was conservation,
has largely failed.
So, Plan B,
geoengineering,
needs to be Plan A,
it seems.
We have to try
everything at this stage,
because we're
in such deep shit.
Can we dial
the thermostat?
Smith:
Right.
Can we, technologically,
grab hold of this car that's
spinning out of control,
and-- and start driving
in the right direction.
Smith:
To find out what's being done
to actually fix the planet,
we spoke to David Keith,
the Harvard scientist
who's leading global
research efforts
in geoengineering,
or the use of technology
to rein in the planet's
rising temperatures.
The world is facing
a huge crisis
in climate change,
global warming,
sea-level rise.
What is the fastest
these solutions
could be implemented?
So, one of the things
that's scary about
solar geo is there's--
it could be done
in dumb ways now.
-Right.
-So the basic idea
isn't new at all.
The very first report
that went to,
sort of, the most powerful
decision maker in the world,
on climate change,
went to President Johnson
in 1965, when I was
two years old.
-Wow.
-So that was the first
really good climate report.
And that report included,
as one of the few things
that was suggested to
deal with the problem,
what we could now call
solar geoengineering,
-a variant of it.
-  Smith:  Yeah.
Keith:
So these ideas
aren't new at all,
and the basic ability has
been around for a long time.
So, it typically means
two really different things
that actually don't have
much to do with each other.
So one of them is the idea
that we might take CO2
out of the atmosphere,
or otherwise,
kind of accelerate
natural syncs for CO.
So taking carbon
out of the atmosphere.
That's correct.
So, the second part is,
solar geoengineering,
which is the idea that
humanity might deliberately
make the Earth a litte
more reflective
to reduce some of the risks
of the accumulated
carbon dioxide.
Smith:
To battle these rising
carbon dioxide levels,
groundbreaking technologies
are being developed
to cool down the Earth
and slow sea-level rise
by removing carbon
from the atmosphere,
brightening clouds,
and even replicating
volcanic eruptions
to reflect sunlight
away from the planet.
And in one experimental
site in the Arctic,
a scientific team
is focusing their work
on the ice itself.
So we sent Ben Anderson
to Alaska's
northern-most town.
Leslie Field:
This is hollow glass
microspheres.
You can think of it as
a form of floating sand.
It's reflective, it's bright.
It's basically
a thin, silica shell
around a gas core.
I mean, a lot of these things,
seem to be about
damage limitation.
-But this is actually
about boosting--
-Yeah, we're--
We're working
on Arctic restoration.
People are attributing
a quarter to a half of
global temperature rise
every year, right now,
is coming from the loss
of that reflective heat shield
in the Arctic.
We-- we want to build that back
to be the Earth's heat shield,
the Earth's refrigerator.
Smith:
The idea is
surprisingly simple:
cover the ice
with reflective sand
to reduce the amount
of sunlight absorbed.
The team is testing
the concept
on a small scale
on a nearby frozen lake.
(wind blowing)
Man:
Oh, shit.
Anderson:
Based on what
you've done so far,
this area will be covered
with your reflective sand.
Roughly, how much longer
will the ice last?
The prediction is days.
Uh, and-- and that
matters on this scale.
Smith:
The long-term goal is
to scale up the process
and pinpoint the areas
in the Arctic
where it will have
the greatest effect.
We're looking at areas on
the order of half a percent
of the Arctic.
By building that back,
you stop this inevitable
heating feedback loop
of getting things
hotter and hotter
and sea levels rising,
um, destabilizing
the jet stream,
and having more
severe storms and such.
Rebuilding ice would be
easier on the wildlife,
would be easier
on the planet.
It's just-- it's one
of the safest things
we can think of
to be able to turn back
to where we were.
The idea is to try to
rebuild a natural system
with the least
possible intervention
you can possibly make.
We really have to
preserve the Arctic.
There's no option there,
and we have to proceed
with all due speed on
all these other
mitigation techniques
that people are using,
I mean, this is just-- it's key.
It's absolutely essential.
They have to work together.
Smith: One of
the mitigation techniques
that Dr. Field mentions
is currently being researched
in Silicon Valley
by a team of retired
engineers and entrepreneurs.
Their goal is to develop
a technology
that can be quickly applied
to kick sunlight away
from the Earth,
and thereby, cool the planet.
These are all my
partners in crime,
so to speak.
Okay! This is
the Dream Team,
here.
This is the Dream Team,
a sort of a geriatric team.
Jack Foster:
We've been doing this
for almost ten years,
and the pay is
really good. Zero!
(laughing)
Smith:
Almost like something
out of a Hollywood film,
Armand Neukermans
and his unconventional team
of engineers
and entrepreneurs
resemble the cast of a
real-life  Space Cowboys
and have actually
banded together
using the seed money
from Bill Gates
and their own
personal savings
to study and develop
a technology
that could actually
brighten clouds.
So why, if you guys
are all successful
ex-inventors
and entrepreneurs,
why work for free on this?
-We're trying to get
an insurance policy.
-Smith: Right.
So if things get really bad,
we're gonna need
to have go-tos,
and this is maybe,
potentially,
one of the go-tos.
-That's right.
-If we don't have to do it,
it means, we've gone so far,
that we're gonna try anything.
Smith:
It's a geoengineering
technology
called "marine
cloud brightening,"
a process that
uses saltwater spray
to whiten clouds.
Why are we trying
to brighten them
in the first place?
-This is how clouds form.
-Yeah.
What we're doing is trying
to enhance that process.
About a quarter of the ocean
has clouds on it.
Take about
30 or 40 percent of that
and you get that
five percent enhanced,
you would reflect
enough sunlight
to almost compensate
for doubling of CO2.
Smith:
The key to their technology
is the spray.
For the effect
to work optimally,
they need to spray trillions
of microscopic salt particles
every second.
There we go.
(Neukermans speaking)
I hope that's not
any weird chemical 'cause
I just put it in my mouth.
-(chuckling) Okay, great.
-All right.
Smith:
Now what's ingenious
about this plan,
is that the salt sprayers can
be deployed on cargo ships
already crossing our oceans.
So why do you believe that
this technology's gonna work?
So, there's good evidence
that it might work
from ship tracks.
So ships make a track,
like a cloud track?
So, along the wind, you know,
the wind blows
in a certain direction,
and those are the--
the hydroscopic particles
and they make clouds just
like these other ones do
if the conditions are there.
Man:
If you look carefully,
even where there
are already clouds,
they're actually whiter, again,
because of a ship track
going underneath them.
Like over here and over here.
Smith:
So it's the same as when
you see a line from a plane,
there's a line from each ship.
That's-- Wow,
I didn't know that.
So you guys say,
"Let's replace the bad
-with the good,"
and brighten them up.
-Yeah, that's right.
Neukermans:
We'll just take seawater
and spray seawater.
Smith:
Essentially, ships
would be outfitted
with a specially
designed nozzle
that can spray
highly condensed
ocean saltwater,
to brighten the clouds
and better reflect
solar radiation
away from the Earth.
I'm doing it, because I really
can't think of anything better
I could be spending my time on.
-I have a kid
in private college.
-Smith: Yeah.
You know, because
I want to ensure
-the best possible
future for him.
-Right.
But if we're, you know,
gonna warm up this planet,
he has, virtually, no future.
That's a good answer
Smith: Now, marine cloud
brightening is a very promising
technology,
but it may not be
enough on its own.
(rumbling)
Simultaneously, another team
is studying volcanoes
and their abilities to
actually darken our skies
and thereby cool the planet.
At one of the most
active volcanoes on Earth,
Guatemala's Volcán de Fuego,
scientists are studying
how ash cloud particles
can effect
global temperatures.
So we visited with
volcanologist Matt Watson,
during the months
before its devastating
eruption this summer
which killed more
than 160 people.
(indistinct shouting)
In 1991,
Mount Pinatubo erupted.
It was the largest eruption
of the 20th century,
and it had a profound
impact on climate.
We saw a drop in temperature
around about half a degree.
We see a drop
in global temperature
after large eruptions,
and that-- that's because
sulfur dioxide is ejected
by volcanoes
into the atmosphere,
that converts into
sulfate aerosol,
which act like
tiny, little mirrors,
and scatter incoming
solar radiation
back out into space.
That has the effect
of cooling the planet.
I'm really interested
in volcanoes as analogs
for deliberate intervention
into the climate system.
It's climate control, right?
It's changing the way the
global climate system works,
to try and reduce
the worst impacts
of climate change.
Smith:
Scientists are now studying
how the deliberate introduction
of sulfur into the atmosphere
would mimic the cooling
effect of volcanic ash.
(Watson speaking)
(man speaks)
Watson:
We're about to fly
a drone into an ash cloud.
And the reason
we want to do that
is because we want
to collect particles
that segue into
climate engineering,
particularly solar
geoengineering,
is two-fold.
Firstly, we need to know,
and understand and control
the size very well.
If the particles get too large,
we might actually induce
the opposite effect
and end up warming the planet.
And secondly,
I'm pretty confident to say
that if we were ever
to do this for real,
we'd need to monitor it
very, very carefully.
All right. Clearance is
one kilometer above Fuego.
Um, we're going up
to the height of Fuego.
Watson:
Ready?
(man on radio)
(buzzing)
Smith:
Particles collected
by the drone
will be studied to better
understand volcanic aerosols
and how to replicate
their cooling effect.
Man:
The drone is about-- gonna be
about the same
elevation as the top.
-It's coming round.
-It is! Yeah.
Man: Okay, we're coming
towards the top of
the clouds now. Over.
Should be almost coming
over to you at this point. Over.
Smith:
Geoengineering, using
volcanic-like particles,
could successfully lower
the planet's temperatures,
but it also carries
the serious potential
for harming crop production
across the world.
This stuff is so terrifying.
It's such a big, scary idea.
We have to be really honest
about the pros
and cons of this stuff,
because there are
nine billion lives
at stake, right?
Smith:
In order to get
a better idea
of the potentially
dangerous side effects
of mimicking volcanoes,
scientists are now
finalizing plans
to spray sulfur particles
from a high-altitude balloon.
What do you think
that the public's reaction?
Because I just--
before you're even doing this,
there's conspiracy theories
about chemtrails
and all of these things.
We've examined all the
Twitter tweet-tweets ever,
Uh, there's a way to do that.
Most of the tweets that
have anything to do
with geoengineering
are about chemtrails.
-Wow!
-Yes!
I mean, as a scientist,
I don't know what to react,
it's nuts.
But as a citizen,
I worry about our ability
to make any
sensible decisions
if a significant fraction
of people believe stuff,
which are just, kinda,
obviously false.
To go back to the realm
of the sane.
We've talked about
the solar reflection.
Bring us-- Like, there's so much
carbon in the atmosphere,
how do we even
make a dent?
How do we scale that up?
How do we-- how do we take
enough out to make it count?
Removing all the carbon
from the atmosphere
is inherently hard
'cause you actually have
to deal with all that material.
I helped to form a start-up
that has an
industrial technology
for removing CO2 from the air,
and we have fought
like crazy
to find industrially
scalable ways
that are cheap to do that.
Our market is capturing CO2
to combine it with hydrogen
that comes from
cheap solar power
to make transportation fuels--
say to energize aircraft
in a carbon-neutral way.
Smith:
Now, in a case
of tragic timing,
just as we arrived to go
see this prototype plan
for carbon recapture,
a state of emergency
had been declared
in British Columbia,
with nearly 600 forest fires
raging out of control,
thereby releasing
massive amounts of carbon
into the atmosphere.
So this is our plant.
Great to have you here.
-This land where
we're at here in Squamish...
-Yeah.
...it's a great example of
climate change at work.
This is a development site.
We're building
lots of houses here
and industry.
But they're having
to raise the land
by about two meters,
-because of the concern
about rising sea levels.
-Right.
Meanwhile, we look around,
and we got 600 forest fires
in BC right now.
So we can't see the mountains
because of the smoke.
So all of this is smoke
from forest fires?
Yeah. 600 in BC.
Oldham:
Everything here
is a working mode,
-full process working.
-Right.
Think of it as, like,
a big cooling tower.
Large fan, the fan
draws the CO2 in.
Chemical reaction,
and we capture the CO.
Wouldn't there be
more carbon to capture
by dirty,
naughty factories?
No, it's uniformly distributed.
Yeah, so we could
put one of these plants
in the middle of Beijing,
or we could
put it in the middle
of the Sahara Desert,
you would capture
the same amount
of atmospheric CO2.
So, we as a species,
have put it in,
so we, as a species,
should be taking it out.
Well, that's our choice,
but I think we have to,
-or find somewhere
else to live.
-(chuckles): Right.
And so, it's basically,
we recycle plastic,
we recycle paper,
we recycle wood,
why don't we recycle energy?
You're hitting the nail
on the head.
We would like people
to be recycling their fuel
in the same way as
they recycle other things.
Smith: Your technology is,
we're gonna refine
that energy,
that carbon out
of the atmosphere,
combine it with
hydrogen and water,
and then that's the same
as gas or jet fuel?
Oldham:
Yeah. Yeah,
it's chemically the same.
No pollutants.
So, for example, our diesel
burns completely clean.
None of that black smoke
you see from trucks
when they go up hills.
-Right.
-Completely clean, but yet,
it's chemically identical.
Oldham:
Got a sample here.
This is the world's first
recyclable fuel.
And here's the
interesting thing.
A carbon-neutral fuel
that's compatible
with any vehicle
in the world today.
Right.
So that car
you just drove up in?
-We can make that
carbon neutral tomorrow.
-Wow.
Any vehicle,
any performance vehicle,
any battered old truck,
airplanes,
we're compatible
with all of those.
Which is significant,
because nobody's
making electric tractors,
-or electric planes.
-Right.
Do you have to do
any modifications?
-No.
-Wow!
If we recycle all the plastic
out of the oceans,
we'd never actually have
to produce anymore plastic
because there's already
enough plastic out there
to continue anew.
So there's enough carbon
in the atmosphere,
that we could just
continually make...
uh, uh,
synthetic fuel like this
-to power our cars?
-Yes, you could.
This is the real--
the killer app
for what we're doing.
So transportation is about
20 percent of the CO2 emissions.
How are we gonna
decarbonize that?
There's a billion cars
in the world.
So if we all go electric,
$50,000 for an electric car,
that's $50 trillion.
Then you've got to deliver
energy and electricity
to each car.
-It's a massive change.
-Yeah.
Alternatively, why don't
we just change the fuel?
The price to you at the pump
will be the same.
Smith:
Cars powered by this fuel
would still release some
carbon into the atmosphere,
but at least they'd be
releasing recycled carbon
that could be captured again.
Having something like
a carbon-neutral gas
isn't even enough.
We've got to start
going negative.
We've got to
actually pull carbon
out of the atmosphere.
Now, can-- can this do that,
and what's the plan there?
Yeah, absolutely.
We can take the CO2
generated here,
and bury that underground
and you get to
negative emissions.
-Right.
-It's a hugely important thing.
And how many
do you need to scale it
to get to carbon negative?
Oldham:
You need less of these
than there are power stations
in the world today
to net emissions out to zero.
And how--
so how many is that?
It's in the region
of tens of thousands.
If we are taking measures
as we should be,
to move emissions elsewhere,
now you start getting
to an overall negative
emissions for the world.
Why isn't the world
rushing to Squamish, BC,
and saying, "Can we please
make 100,000 of these?"
-So, first of all, we're open
and ready to receive the world.
-Yeah.
Um, secondly,
we've really just got
to proof of concept here,
and it's working.
So the next step of our business
is to expand across the globe...
-Smith: Scale.
-...make carbon-neutral fuel,
and when the scientists
and the governments
decide that they need
to do negative emissions,
the technology's ready.
Smith:
Now, obviously creating
a carbon-neutral fuel
made by refining it out of
pre-existing greenhouse gasses
would be a positive first step,
however there is so much
carbon in the atmosphere,
that we need to get
to negative emissions,
effectively going backwards,
and reversing the
greenhouse effects
and actually cooling down
the planet
by removing more CO2
than we're adding
and sequestering the
excess carbon underground.
Now, while these
technologies are promising,
and give us hope
for a brighter future,
all human innovation, it seems,
come with unintended
consequences.
There could also
be a negative
if countries weaponize,
or not even weaponize,
but say, "You know what?
"I need a little bit more,
or a little bit less rain.
I'm gonna do this.
I'm gonna add that."
Could this be
the new arms race?
No technologies come without
the potential for misuse.
So, I think there are
really two kinds of misuse
we're worried about.
One is, sort of,
actual misuse in action.
That is, some country
tries to make more rain
in one place,
and that makes it
worse for somebody else.
That's a realistic fear,
I think.
Smith:
And weather
manipulation technology
is already being tested.
(firing)
Newswoman:
China spends millions
of dollars every year
on the world's largest
cloud-seeding program,
using it frequently
to mitigate drought.
Another form
of misuse is the--
the misuse of these
being over-promoted
and being used as a way
to weaken efforts
to cut emissions
of carbon pollution,
which we must cut
if we want to deal
with the climate crisis.
This is our solution, then,
and we can keep driving
all our cars and everything.
Absolutely.
Say, the big petrol states,
or Exxon, or people who
want to push against
the need to reduce
CO2 emissions,
they will over-claim
how well this works
and kind of
want to use it
-as a "Get out
of Jail Free" card.
-Right.
So they'll want to say, "Ah,
we don't need to worry now.
"Just go back
and drive your SUVs
"and fly as much as you like,
and we don't need
to cut emissions."
Smith:
Our failure to stop
greenhouse emissions
after years of scientific
evidence and warnings
has gotten us
to this dangerous place,
and it is quickly becoming
the greatest threat
to our species
The irony here is,
that the scientists
most invested in
studying geoengineering,
are the same ones
who are most afraid
of its consequences.
Box:
We have started this era
of-- of geoengineering.
It's just beginning.
It's going to be a wild ride.
I don't see us
backing away from it.
It's the engineering project
of the century.
Field:
There's this whole moral
hazard to geoengineering.
If you have a solution,
people say, "Great!
I don't have to change a thing."
And that's not the message
that people should get.
Smith:
I hope this
never has to be used,
but if we get to a point
where we do have to use it,
it's probably going to be...
(Neukermans speaking)
We should be thinking of this,
you know, as a war.
Yeah.
Oldham:
I think we need to be
reducing our emissions
in multiple different areas.
You can't rely on
one solution for everything.
This is not a panacea.
We would be
foolish as a species
to rely on
just one technology
or just one solution.
We need multiple solutions.
It's a huge problem.
Watson:
Worst case scenario,
it might be the dumbest
thing we ever do.
It's a very odd situation
to work on something
that you really hope
never happens.
Were we ever to actually
deploy solar geoengineering
full-scale,
it's the clearest indication
that we failed.
It's a desperate act,
make no bones about it.
If there's a way
not to do this,
every academic
that's working on it
will rejoice.
♪ ♪
DOCTOR: Count down from ten.
-Ten, nine...
-(MACHINE CLICKS)
SHANE SMITH:
On the next episode of  VICE:
hacking the human brain.
SCIENTIST: We have impulses
that drive behavior.
If we can target that activity
we can alter that decision
by blocking the impulse.
We need to make sure
we understand
the implications of this.
'Cause you can do
a lot of damage in there?
Absolutely.
SMITH: And, violence
is on the rise again in Rio.
POLICE OFFICER:
MAN:
SMITH: It's an all new episode
of  VICE.